Prideful Nat Traversal
Peter Naylor
October 5, 2025

The most commonly employed solution in Network Address Translation traversal,
often absolutely essential for P2P networking options, is the Session Traversal
Utilities for NAT (or STUN) protocol, which, in practice, involves leveraging a
STUN-compliant program on a remote server for NAT mapping enumeration. Indeed,
at this point, our own P2P application, the instant messenger Swiss,
accomplishes its traversal via contacting a remote STUN server. STUN is
undoubtedly a valuable and useful method of easily and efficiently resolving
traversal issues, while expending a minimal amount of system resources. Despite
this, however, it violates a fundamental concept of idealized P2P networking,
and for this, it cannot be forgiven.

The ideal of a P2P system is to facilitate a network connection between two
arbitrary peers located on arbitrary subnets (with the word subnet being used
incredibly loosely here to essentially refer to anything from a Metropolitan
Area Network to a router-managed home network) without requiring the services of
any other host on any other network; in essence, in an ideal P2P solution, the
two peers ought be able to interact as though they are the only hosts in
existence (sans whatever routing hosts/links/relays might be necessary to move
the network data along in the first place, which obviously cannot be replaced in
any networking solution that does not wish to upend the entire status quo).
STUN's violation of this ideal is obvious: it possesses a fundamental
client-server structure, where the server must by definition not be the peer
with whom which communication is desired. Thus, a STUN solution demands
acknowledging the existence of other hosts, which is anathema to the P2P ideal
described above.

We propose a new solution to NAT traversal that adheres strictly to the
idealized principles of P2P networking: Prideful Nat Traversal. Our method, as
the name suggests, returns traversal's pride to it, freeing it from needing to
rely on the strengths of others, and giving it the tools to succeed as an
independent agent in the networking world. Our method does not intend to replace
or supercede more heretical styles such as STUN; such options will always be
more effective and effecient, due to relying on external services allowing for a
much lower margin of error in employed traversal strategies. Nevertheless,
Prideful NT aims to be the de facto solution for circumventing NATted networks
in a pure P2P environment. 
